Title: Aneugen Molecular Mechanism Assay: Proof-of-Concept With 27 Reference Chemicals.

Abstract: A tiered bioassay and data analysis scheme is described for elucidating the most common molecular targets responsible for chemical-induced in vitro aneugenicity: tubulin destabilization, tubulin stabilization, and inhibition of mitotic kinase(s). To evaluate this strategy, TK6 cells were first exposed to each of 27 presumed aneugens over a range of concentrations. After 4 and 24 h of treatment, γH2AX, p53, phospho-histone H3 (p-H3), and polyploidization biomarkers were evaluated using the MultiFlow DNA Damage Assay Kit. The assay identified 27 of 27 chemicals as genotoxic, with 25 exhibiting aneugenic signatures, 1 aneugenic and clastogenic, and 1 clastogenic. Subsequently, a newly described follow-up assay was employed to investigate the aneugenic agents' molecular targets. For these experiments, TK6 cells were exposed to each of 26 chemicals in the presence of 488 Taxol. After 4 h, cells were lysed and the liberated nuclei and mitotic chromosomes were stained with a nucleic acid dye and labeled with fluorescent antibodies against p-H3 and Ki-67. Flow cytometric analyses revealed that alterations to 488 Taxol-associated fluorescence were only observed with tubulin binders-increases in the case of tubulin stabilizers, decreases with destabilizers. Mitotic kinase inhibitors with known Aurora kinase B inhibiting activity were the only aneugens that dramatically decreased the ratio of p-H3-positive to Ki-67-positive nuclei. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering based on 488 Taxol fluorescence and p-H3: Ki-67 ratios clearly distinguished compounds with these disparate molecular mechanisms. Furthermore, a classification algorithm based on an artificial neural network was found to effectively predict molecular target, as leave-one-out cross-validation resulted in 25/26 agreement with a priori expectations. These results are encouraging, as they suggest that an adequate number of training set chemicals, in conjunction with a machine learning algorithm based on 488 Taxol, p-H3, and Ki-67 responses, can reliably elucidate the most commonly encountered aneugenic molecular targets.
